Network Address Translation
The devices on your local home or office network each have a private IP address that they use to communicate directly with each other. 
In order for the devices with private IP addresses to communicate with the public internet, they need to have a public IP address. Otherwise, 
responses will not be routed correctly. Instead of having a dedicated public IP address for each of the devices on the local network, the router
can replace a private source IP address with its public IP address and perform the reverse operation for responses. This process is known as Network 
Address Translation (NAT) and it generally requires a router or firewall to be specifically configured to perform NAT. NAT is a part of layer 2 (internet layer) 
and layer 3 (transport layer) of the TCP/IP model.

  Private IP Addresses                                                                     Public IP Addresses
  Assigned by network admins
  Unique only within private network
  No cost to use
  Address ranges:
    10.0.0.0-10.255.255.255
    172.16.0.0-172.31.255.255
    192.168.0.0-192.168.255.255                                                              Assigned by ISP and IANA
                                                                                             Unique address in global internet
                                                                                             Costs to lease a public IP address
                                                                                             Address ranges:
                                                                                              1.0.0.0-9.255.255.255
                                                                                              11.0.0.0-126.255.255.255
                                                                                              128.0.0.0-172.15.255.255
                                                                                              172.32.0.0-192.167.255.255
                                                                                               192.169.0.0-233.255.255.255
                                                                                               
Dynamic Host Control Protocol
Dynamic Host Control Protocol (DHCP) is in the management family of network protocols. DHCP is an application layer 
protocol used on a network to configure devices. It assigns a unique IP address and provides the addresses of the appropriate 
DNS server and default gateway for each device. DHCP servers operate on UDP port 67 while DHCP clients operate on UDP port 68.

Address Resolution Protocol
By now, you are familiar with IP and MAC addresses. You’ve learned that each device on a network has both an IP address that identifies 
it on the network and a MAC address that is unique to that network interface. A device’s IP address may change over time, but its MAC address 
is permanent. Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is an internet layer protocol in the TCP/IP model used to translate the IP addresses that are 
found in data packets into the MAC address of the hardware device. 

Each device on the network performs ARP and keeps track of matching IP and MAC addresses in an ARP cache. ARP does not have a specific port number.

Telnet 
Telnet is an application layer protocol that allows a device to communicate with another device or server. Telnet sends all information in 
clear text. It uses command line prompts to control another device similar to secure shell (SSH), but Telnet is not as secure as SSH. Telnet 
can be used to connect to local or remote devices and uses TCP port 23. 

Secure shell
Secure shell protocol (SSH) is used to create a secure connection with a remote system. This application layer protocol provides an 
alternative for secure authentication and encrypted communication. SSH operates over the TCP port 22 and is a replacement for less secure 
protocols, such as Telnet.

Post office protocol
Post office protocol (POP) is an application layer (layer 4 of the TCP/IP model) protocol used to manage and retrieve email from a mail server.
Many organizations have a dedicated mail server on the network that handles incoming and outgoing mail for users on the network. User devices will 
send requests to the remote mail server and download email messages locally. If you have ever refreshed your email application and had new emails 
populate in your inbox, you are experiencing POP and internet message access protocol (IMAP) in action. Unencrypted, plaintext authentication uses 
TCP/UDP port 110 and encrypted emails use Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) over TCP/UDP port 995.  When using POP, mail has 
to finish downloading on a local device before it can be read and it does not allow a user to sync emails. 

Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)
IMAP is used for incoming email. It downloads the headers of emails, but not the content. The content remains on the email server, 
which allows users to access their email from multiple devices. IMAP uses TCP port 143 for unencrypted email and TCP port 993 over the TLS protocol. 
Using IMAP allows users to partially read email before it is finished downloading and to sync emails. However, IMAP is slower than POP3.

Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) is used to transmit and route email from the sender to the recipient’s address. 
SMTP works with Message Transfer Agent (MTA) software, which searches DNS servers to resolve email addresses to IP addresses, 
to ensure emails reach their intended destination. SMTP uses TCP/UDP port 25 for unencrypted emails and TCP/UDP port 587 using TLS for encrypted emails. 
The TCP port 25 is often used by high-volume spam. SMTP helps to filter out spam by regulating how many emails a source can send at a time.

Protocols and port numbers
Remember that port numbers are used by network devices to determine what should be done with the information contained in each data packet once 
they reach their destination. Firewalls can filter out unwanted traffic based on port numbers. For example, an organization may configure a firewall to 
only allow access to TCP port 995 (POP3) by IP addresses belonging to the organization.

As a security analyst, you will need to know about many of the protocols and port numbers mentioned in this course. They may be used to 
determine your technical knowledge in interviews, so it’s a good idea to memorize them. You will also learn about new protocols on the job in a 
security position.



